the heap while it's not as famous or as
versatile as its cousin the binary
search tree it is still extremely famous
and is well known particularly for the
application we're gonna do in this
lecture which is the priority queue
heaps by the way are not at all related
to something you might hear sometimes
called the heap on your computer that's
something you learn in some other course
say 61c at berkeley and it is just
unfortunate that it happens to share
names but completely unrelated so unlike
other data structures I'm actually just
gonna give the structure of this one
away
instead I haven't you interactively
develop it with me and I think it's just
cuz I haven't figured out a way to make
it interesting and I'm not sure that
it's possible instead I'm gonna give
away the structure and I'll let you come
up with the way to do the operations ok
so the idea with a heap is what is it
okay we're gonna define a binary min
heap as a binary tree that is complete
and it obeys the min heap property so
what are these two terms mean well the
mid heap property means that every node
is less than or equal to both of its
children that's a simple idea the other
idea is a little more complicated it's
known as completeness and we'll say that
a tree is complete if it's missing items
only at the bottom level if anything is
missing at all and all nodes are as far
left as possible now this isn't exactly
a mathematical definition but what it's
trying to do is capture the notion of
bushiness and so I'll give you a few
examples at the bottom of the page
because rather than write out some kind
of long symbolic definition of
completeness I think the idea here is
very intuitive from examples so here we
have a tree that is a binary min heap
and every node is less than or equal to
both of its children and we're not
missing any items at all it's really
bushy here's a tree that's great
wonderfully bushy nothing's missing look
right there's no gaps if you are a bird
you can safely land anywhere and feel
great and every item will note is less
than or equal to both of its children
here is a tree which is actually also a
binary many now it's not as wondrous as
this one in terms of its you know you
might think of this as not quite as
bushy but I mean you know if you had to
draw a tree there was this bushy as
possible that only had six elements this
is what it would look like in that sense
it's complete
here is a tree which is incomplete and
the reason it's incomplete is there is
something missing and it's at the bottom
level which is okay but not all nodes
are as far left as possible
so those are kind of like a hole in the
middle whereas this one its compact all
the way to the bottom to the left right
that's probably little confusing anyway
sorry people reading captions instead of
listening but all the nodes are all the
way intellect and this last one is it
lacks the min heap property here we see
that the values that if we look on this
branch on the right we see 0 is less
than 1 is less than 6 good but on the
left branch it's 0 is less than 5 is
less than 4 no that's false right it
doesn't work out and so this right here
lacks the min-hee property okay
now to make sure that all makes sense
I'd like you to think about how many of
these trees are min heaps and I'll give
you guys a little bit of a chance to
think about this and I'll be waiting
here ok so this first one total a heap
right has duplicates but every item is
less than or equal to its child and it
does also complete this tree is
incomplete while it's true it's you know
it has if you think of it as a entity
there's no like holes in the middle or
anything we noticed that there are
missing items not just at the bottom
level but also the top level so by
missing I mean that every node should
have two children unless it's at the
bottom level and here we see this one is
missing a left child I'm sorry right
child I have to do this thing by the way
when I'm doing these videos we have to
keep in mind that your left is my right
but it only applies to real life this is
left even though it's my right but on
the screen this is right and this is
left anyway not important so this last
one here this one this tree here it
lacks the min heap property the last bad
tree it lacks the min heap property and
if we look very carefully the problem
here is that 4 is less than 7 good
seven is not less than or equal to five
and this tree actually as it happens on
the far right it is actually a min-heap
right it's complete the only thing
missing is on this bottom level and all
the notes are as far left as then go and
it is also obeys the mid heap property
so why do we care about heaps what's
good about them
well heaps lend themselves very
naturally to building a priority queue
they're basically invented to do
priority queues so one question that
pops up then is how do we start
supporting all the operations so the
first question I hope is fairly easy
which is how would you support get
smallest if I gave you an entity like
this right a tree possibly unimaginably
large with quadrillions of elements and
I told you where's the smallest thing
how would you return it okay so the
answer is it's always going to be at the
root because this is the item which is
smaller than everything on the left and
the right subtree so the smallest must
always be at the top so now I turn to
you how do we support the other
operations how do we support ad and if
you're game for it remove smallest so if
we look at this heap which is what I'm
going to be using in my demo the
question is how would we insert three
into this heap right here and you could
think about it however you want right
you might even I think this is actually
a really interesting exercise and it's
worth spending five or ten minutes
actually really thinking about this and
seeing if you can come up with the right
answer and there is a right answer once
you find that you'll know and but I'll
spoil it in the next video anyway but
the run time right if you want to do it
correctly if you want it to be fast I
want it to be logarithmic so I'll see
you in the next video and good luck with
that